# TROCAS Project Description

The [main stem of the Amazon River](http://amazonwaters.org/basins/) is a large supplier of carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) to the atmosphere, most of which is sourced as organic carbon from the surrounding landscape and subsequently remineralized in river. The component of the river system that is least well understood is the tidal reach, which consists of two main channels each three times the girth of the Mississippi River at its widest point. While tidal forcing does not result in salt intrusion, riverine flow in this reach can be reversed, and complex interactions occur between the river channels and the fringe areas, making the study of this component of the world’s largest river a significant logistical challenge. In recognition of earlier work demonstrating that pCO<sub>2</sub> and outgassing remains very elevated in the lower Amazon River, we previously evaluated the respective components of [Net Ecosystem Exchange (NEE)](https://sciencing.com/definition-net-ecosystem-exchange-6802053.html) from [Óbidos](https://www.google.com/maps/@-1.8583906,-55.5930507,9z) downriver to [Macapá](https://www.google.com/maps/@0.0387726,-50.8306162,9z) over four cruises, focusing on how metabolic processes apparently drive the elevated pCO<sub>2</sub> and subsequent outgassing, relative to advective fluxes. Two pilot cruises were made from Macapá down to the actual river mouth, evaluating the seaward propagation of the pCO<sub>2</sub> signal. Preliminary measurements that fluxes of CO<sub>2</sub> to the atmosphere remain high out to the freshwater terminus located ~60km offshore from the river mouth.

Aside from these initial surveys, no systematic measurements have ever been made in the lower reach out into the plume. Considering the vast amount of surface area this region encompasses, its evaluation will significantly increase global estimates of aquatic CO<sub>2</sub> outgassing and help complete global carbon flux estimates. Likewise, there is little mechanistic understanding of the biological and physiochemical processes that control carbon cycling in this transition zone. **The overall research objective of TROCAS** (Trocas Líquidas de Carbono do Ecossistema do Baixo Rio Amazonas: Da Terra para o Oceano e Atmosfera; Net Ecosystem Exchange of the Lower Amazon: from Land to the Ocean and Atmosphere) **is to examine, at different scales, the processes that govern the advection and reaction of carbon in the lowest reach of the Amazon River and along the near-shore coastline of the tropical North Atlantic Ocean. Two primary questions are being addressed:**
1. What are the geographic and temporal distributions and magnitudes of riverine CO<sub>2</sub> production (system-scale)
2. What are the dynamics that drive and control outgassing (microbial-scale)? 

To evaluate these questions, tools from satellite remote sensing to proteomics are being deployed.

The overall TROCAS dataset is complex, from detailed chemical analysis to continuous underway recordings to remote sensing data to hydrology. Information needs to flow between members and ultimately to the outside world. The window to TROCAS is provided via an evolving project website. The intent of the website is to organize the multiple levels of data and provide data processing tools, as well as a broader vision of the overall project and its team members. 

## Project Team

The Centro de Energia Nuclear na Agricultura (CENA, Piracicaba) and the University of Washington (UW, Seattle) are the lead institutions. Partners in the Amazon include the Universidade Federal do Amapá (UNIFAP, Macapá), the Universidade do Estado do Amapá (UEAP, Macapá), the Universidade Federal do Oeste do Pará (UFOPA, Santarém), and the Universidade Federal Rural da Amazônia (UFRA). Outside of the Amazon, the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE, Sao José dos Campos) and the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (COPPE/UFRJ, Rio).

## Funding

TROCAS is funded by the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP, the science-funding organization of the State of São Paulo), through their “São Paulo Excellence Chair (SPEC)” thematic program, and the Universidade de São Paulo, and by the NSF Ecosystem Studies program ([NSF Award 1754317: Biogeochemical Processes along the Lower Amazon River Continuum](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1754317)).
